
=encoding utf8

=head1 TITLE

DRAFT: Synopsis 32: Setting Library - Temporal

=head1 AUTHORS

    The authors of the related Perl 5 docs
    Rod Adams <rod@rodadams.net>
    Larry Wall <larry@wall.org>
    Aaron Sherman <ajs@ajs.com>
    Mark Stosberg <mark@summersault.com>
    Carl Mäsak <cmasak@gmail.com>
    Moritz Lenz <moritz@faui2k3.org>
    Tim Nelson <wayland@wayland.id.au>
    Daniel Ruoso <daniel@ruoso.com>
    Dave Rolsky <autarch@urth.org>

=head1 VERSION

    Created: 19 Mar 2009 extracted from S29-functions.pod and S16-IO.pod
    Last Modified: 9 Sep 2009
    Version: 4

The document is a draft.

If you read the HTML version, it is generated from the Pod in the pugs
repository under /docs/Perl6/Spec/S32-setting-library/Temporal.pod so edit it there in
the SVN repository if you would like to make changes.

=head1 Classes

=head2 Instant

The epoch used in Perl 6 to represent time instants is the
International Atomic Time - TAI - which is independent of calendars,
timezones as well as leap seconds. Of course Perl can't go beyond the
machine to get a real TAI value, but it should perform any
platform-specific transformation to give you the most precise value it
can for the TAI.

 our Instant sub time()

Returns a TAI epoch value for the current time.

=head2 Duration

Duration objects describe an amount of time, it's the fundamental type
for time math. The base Duration object is only TAI-seconds aware, but
if you use its constructor with any other parameters it will delegate
to Gregorian::Duration in order to make the most common cases easier.

The following attribute is declared:

=over

=item tai

Returns the amount of TAI seconds described in this duration. Note
that usually you shouldn't be doing math with the result of .tai for
different datetime and duration objects. The result of .tai might also
be an estimated value for Duration types that depend on an anchor date
(i.e.: 1 month).

=back

=head2 Calendar

Every DateTime needs to follow the rules of a given calendar. The
default is the Gregorian calendar, but several other calendars exist
in the real world.

The current default calendar is stored in $*CALENDAR.

=over

=item method calendartime($epoch = time(), *%options)

=item multi calendartime($epoch = time(), $calendar = $*CALENDAR, *%options)

Returns a DateTime object in the current calendar for the given TAI
epoch time. Each calendar type might accept different options.

Note that simply changing the current calendar is not magically going
to make any code portable to different calendars. The code using it
should either use only the methods in the generic Calendar and
DateTime classes, or special case for the known Calendars.

=item method formatter is rw

The default formatter object used for DateTime objects in this
calendar.

=back

=head2 Calendar::TimeZoneObservant

This is a generic class used to identify all calendars that observe the
time zones. Not all calendars are time-zone observant. One way or
another, two multi subs will be available that depend on a time-zone
observant calendar. They will fail if you try to call them with a
non-tz calendar.

This class also implies that the C<calendartime> method might receive a
time-zone named parameter.

=over

=item method gmtime($epoch = time(), *%options )

=item multi gmtime($epoch = time(), $calendar = $*CALENDAR, *%options)

Returns a DateTime object in the GMT timezone, considering C<$epoch> to
be TAI. Same as:

 calendartime($epoch, $calendar, :time-zone<GMT>)

=item method localtime($epoch = time(), *%options )

=item multi localtime($epoch = time(), $calendar = $*CALENDAR, *%options)

Returns a DateTime object in the local timezone taken from the system,
considering $epoch to be TAI. Same as:

 calendartime($epoch, $calendar, :time-zone<local>)

=back

=head2 DateTime

The generic DateTime class specifies the basic operations that should
be possible independent of the Calendar being used, and are,
therefore, considerably restricted.

In order to make it easier to deal with the most common scenario, the
contructor of the bare DateTime type will delegate to
Gregorian::DateTime.

It defines the following attributes.

=over

=item formatter

The object that will stringify this specific object.

=item calendar

Returns the calendar that governs this datetime.

=back

And the following methods

=over

=item tai

Returns the TAI value for this specific datetime, useful for
inter-calendar comparison and conversion.

=back

=head2 TimeZone

This is the base for the entire time-zone database with the complete
information about daylight-saving-time and other variations that can
happen.

This should be a straight port from perl 5 DateTime::TimeZone module.

=head2 TimeRange

This object represents a given period of time, it might be composed
by:

=over

=item Start and end DateTime

=item Start DateTime and Duration

=item Duration and end DateTime

=back

=head2 Gregorian::Calendar

Also known as the "civil" calendar. This is the calendar used in most
of the world, specially in the western countries.

=head2 Gregorian::DateTime

The gregorian DateTime declares the following additional attributes.

=over

=item year

=item month

=item day

=item minute

=item second

=item nanosecond

=item time-zone

=back

The class provides a constructor which either accepts the attributes as
named parameters, or takes a single string value with a date/time
value. If both the string and named parameters are passed, the named
parameters take precedence. The string value can have any of the following
forms, all taken from ISO 8601:

=over

=item '2010-04-01 00:00' Separate date and time.

=item '2010-04-01T00:00' Combined date and time.

=item '2010-04-01' Just the date. Assumes 00:00.

=item '2010-04' Just the year and month. Assumes the first of that month.

=item '2010' Just the year. Assumes January.

=item '2010-091' Year and three-digit day-of-year.

=item '01:02:03' Time. Assumes today.

=item '01:02' Hours and minutes. Assumes 00 seconds.

=item '01' Just hours.

=item '01:02:03Z' UTC time. All time designations can end in a 'Z'.

=back

The following methods provide additional information:

=over

=item day-of-week

=item day-of-year

=item week-of-month

=item week-of-year

=back

By default, a C<Gregorian::DateTime> object stringifies to something of
the form C<'2010-04-01T00:00'>.

=head2 Gregorian::Duration

The gregorian Duration declares the following attributes.

=over

=item years

=item months

=item days

=item minutes

=item seconds

=item nanoseconds

=back

As with C<Gregorian::DateTime>, this class provides a constructor which either
accepts the attributes as named parameters, or takes a single string value
with a duration value, and here also the named parameters take precedence. The
string value can have any of the following forms:

=over

=item 'P1Y1M1DT1H1M1S'

The letters stand for 'period', 'years', 'months',
'days', 'time', 'hours', 'minutes', and 'seconds', respectively. The
1's stand in for any non-negative integer, which may be arbitrarily large.

=item The above format with any one of the letter/digit groups omitted.

The omitted groups are assumed to be 0. The following exceptions hold:
the 'P' may not be removed. The 'T' may be removed, but keep in mind
that it's used to disambiguate between months and minutes.

=item Any of the above with the least significant specified value a fractional value.

'P0.5Y' would mean 'half a year', for example.

=item A duration on the form 'P2010-04-01T00:00:00'

Where any number of the least significant values may be omitted.
By contrast with the above forms, this form doesn't allow values to exceed
their "carry-over point", so a month value may not be '13' and an hour value
may not be '25', for example.

=back

By default, a C<Gregorian::DateTime> object stringifies to the second format
given above, and omits letter/digit groups where the number is 0.

=head1 Additions

Please post errors and feedback to perl6-language.  If you are making
a general laundry list, please separate messages by topic.

